docs/index.adoc, before:

= Starter: My first web app
:toc: right
:imagesdir: media/

A step-by-step tutorial for building your first web application with Enonic XP

== Introduction

This guide will take you through the basic steps of creating a web app, using the basic building blocks of Enonic XP.

During this exercise you will:

* learn about http controllers and view templates
* optimize serving of static assets
* make use of the router library
* set up a vhost, and more..

image::nerd2code.svg["Ready, set, code!",width=720px]

== Create project

To setup a project locally, simply run the following command:

  enonic project create

Choose "*My first web app*" from the list of starters, create a *new XP sandbox* and complete the setup wizard.

NOTE: *Don't have the Enonic CLI?* Visit the https://developer.enonic.com/start[Getting started guide] to install it.


== Project structure

The project folder created should now contain a project structure, looking something like this:

[source,files]
----
build.gradle <--1-->
settings.gradle
build/ <--2-->
src/
  main/
    java/ <!--3-->
    resources/ <!--4-->
      assets/ <!--5-->
      webapp/ <!--6-->
----

<1> The gradle files are used by the build system
<2> Contains output files produced by the build
<3> Optional folder for Java code (used to import sample site in this starter)
<4> Main location for XP specific project code
<5> Static assets such as css and icons are placed here
<6> Folder containing the root webapp http controller

== Building and Deploying

To build and deploy the app, run this command from your shell:

  enonic project deploy

Accept starting the sandbox

[NOTE]
====
To verify that your app started successfully, you should find an entry similar to this in the sandbox log:

  2019-04-09 13:40:40,765 INFO ... Application [<name.of.your.app>] installed successfully
====



== Webapp

To see your current application:

. log in to the XP admin console (http://localhost:8080)
. open the "Applications" app, and select the listed applications
. visit the app by clicking the web app link.

video::webapp.mp4["Logging in, opening apps and launching webapp" width=1024px]


== JS Controller

The essense of a web application is the controller.
In your project, you will find the following file:

.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
exports.get = function (req) {
  var title = "Hello Web app";
  return  {
  body: `
<html>
  <head>
    <title>${title}</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
      <h1>Sweet, "${title}" is working!</h1>
      <img src="html5logo.svg"/>
  </body>
</html>
`
  }
};
----

This controller file is automatically executed when your web app is being accessed.

The example above is also referencing two asset files.
These files can be found in the `src/main/resources/assets/` folder of your project.

[NOTE]
====
By default, the web app engine automatically serves files placed in the `asset/` as if they were located in the root of your web app.
====

== Using Views

According to the MVC (Model View Controller) pattern,
we should separate the View (template) from the controller.
Enonic XP supports a variety of templating engines.
In this step, we'll use https://market.enonic.com/vendors/enonic/thymeleaf-lib[Thymeleaf]:

. To make sure Thymeleaf is available for our project, we must update the `gradle.build` file.
Uncomment the following line from the "dependencies" section:
+
      include "com.enonic.lib:lib-thymeleaf:2.0.0-RC1"
+
. Create a new file `hello.html` and add it to the `webapp/` folder
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,html]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/hello.html[]
----
+
. Then update your controller file to use the new template:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/webapp.js[]
----
+
. When finished, redeploy the app. NB! Just start a new shell if your current shell is running the sandbox:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

Refresh your app, and you should see the heading "*Sweet... Views are working too!*".

[TIP]
====
A cool feature related to Thymeleaf templates is that they are actually pure HTML.
Meaning they may be opened directly in your browser.
Try opening the hello.html file to see for yourself:
====

image::hello-dummy.png["Screenshot of template showing dummy heading and html5 logo",width=800px]

== Asset serving

The current approach of asset serving is simple, but has several pitfalls.
Luckily, XP provides a better solution for serving assets:

* Asset url are created automatically (no need to deal with relative paths)
* Assets get 1 year cache headers (used by proxies and browsers)
* Every time you deploy a new app, new url's are generated (no more stale assets)

To use this functionality, we simply need a new template file:

. Update your `hello.html` template with the following content:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/hello-assets.html[]
----
+
. Redeploy once more:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

TIP: Try looking at the "Network" tab in your browsers developer tools to see the url and cache headers

== Routing

Routing, or handling different URLs within your app is a common requirement for web applications.

In this step we will create a basic server-side router.
In addition to the start page, we will create two more pages and handle navigation between them.

. Update your `webapp.js` and `hello.html` as follows:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-router/webapp.js[]
----
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-router/hello.html[]
----
+
. To make the router library available for our app, add the following line to the dependencies section of the `build.gradle` file.
+
  include 'com.enonic.lib:lib-router:2.0.0-RC1'
+
. Build and deploy the app once more to see the result:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

Once the app is deployed, reload and enjoy navigating between the pages.

NOTE: The pageUrl() view function is used to dynamically generate server relative URLs for the pages. This eliminates the need for dealing with relative links etc.


////
== Error handler

You might have noticed the "404 FTW" link in your app by now, and maybe even clicked it?
Essentially, the this url is not handled by the router, and returns the default error page.

We can do better, as XP provides a concept for generic http error handling. Lets add error handling to our app:

. Add a new controller `error.js` to your project as follows:
+
.src/main/resources/error/error.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/error/error.js[]
----
+
. Build, deploy and try out your new error handler:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

== Config management

TODO

Our app is using the Google Maps API.
Heavy usage of Googles services requires a valid API key.

Hardcoding an API key into your app is far from ideal.
Luckily, XP provides a simple way to inject configuration, like the API key, without having to change your app.

. Start by https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript/get-api-key[getting yourself a Google API key]
. Create a file called <name.of.your.app>.cfg i.e. "my.first.site.cfg" with the following content:
+
  maps.apiKey = <your google api key>
+
. Copy this file into your sandbox' config folder. The sandbox is located in your users home folder at .enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sandbox>/home/config/
. After placing the file in the sandbox, you should now see a line from the sandbox log showing something like this:
+
  2019-05-05 20:07:39,462 INFO  c.e.x.s.i.config.ConfigInstallerImpl - Loaded config for [<name.of.your.app>]
+

To verify that the configuration is in use,
check the source code for a country page to see the following:
+
  <script src="http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/js?key=yourGoogleKey>"></script></head>
+

////


== Setting up a vhost

Our webapp URL does not look like something we would want in production.
XP provides a concept called Vhosts to map the internal XP URI to a public facing URL i.e. `mywebapp.com` -> `/webapp/my.app.name/`.

. Start by locating your sandbox' config folder. It is placed within your users home folder at `.enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sandbox>/home/config/`
. Update the `com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg` file in the config/ folder as follows:
+
.enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sanbox>/home/config/com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg[]
----
+
NOTE: Remember to update the value of `mapping.mywebapp.target` to match the URI to your webapp i.e. "/webapp/my.cool.app/"
+
. After saving the vhost config file, you should see the following line the XP Sandbox log:
+
  2019-05-10 11:34:17,234 INFO  c.e.x.w.v.i.c.VirtualHostConfigImpl - Virtual host is enabled and mappings updated.
+
. Finally, a small trick to fool our browser into thinking `mywebapp.com` is pointing to your local machine. Add the following line to your hosts file.
+
  127.0.0.1	mywebapp.com
+
NOTE: On Mac/Linux_: `/etc/hosts`, on Windows: `c:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc\hosts`
+
. Point your browser to http://mywebapp.com:8080 to see the glorious result.

Read more about https://developer.enonic.com/docs/xp/stable/deployment/config#vhost[vhost configuration] in the XP docs.

== Logging

While developing an app, it can be helpful to do some logging.
Try adding the following line into the exports.get section of your webapp controller and see what happens:

  log.info('Testing logging: %s', JSON.stringify(req, null, 4));

NOTE: A simplified logging function and many more are included in the https://market.enonic.com/vendors/enonic/util-lib[Util Library]

Commit message:

finished fixing errors after another iteration of testing

docs/index.adoc, after:

= Starter: My first web app
:toc: right
:imagesdir: media/

A step-by-step tutorial for building your first web application with Enonic XP

== Introduction

This guide will take you through the basic steps of creating a web app, using the basic building blocks of Enonic XP.

During this exercise you will:

* learn about http controllers and view templates
* optimize serving of static assets
* make use of the router library
* set up a vhost, and more..

image::nerd2code.svg["Ready, set, code!",width=720px]

== Create project

To setup a project locally, simply run the following command:

  enonic project create

Choose "*My first web app*" from the list of starters, create a *new XP sandbox* and complete the setup wizard.

NOTE: *Don't have the Enonic CLI?* Visit the https://developer.enonic.com/start[Getting started guide] to install it.


== Project structure

The project folder created should now contain a project structure, looking something like this:

[source,files]
----
build.gradle <--1-->
settings.gradle
build/ <--2-->
src/
  main/
    java/ <!--3-->
    resources/ <!--4-->
      assets/ <!--5-->
      webapp/ <!--6-->
----

<1> The gradle files are used by the build system
<2> Contains output files produced by the build
<3> Optional folder for Java code (used to import sample site in this starter)
<4> Main location for XP specific project code
<5> Static assets such as css and icons are placed here
<6> Folder containing the root webapp http controller

== Building and Deploying

To build and deploy the app, run this command from your shell:

  enonic project deploy

Accept starting the sandbox

[NOTE]
====
To verify that your app started successfully, you should find an entry similar to this in the sandbox log:

  2019-04-09 13:40:40,765 INFO ... Application [<name.of.your.app>] installed successfully
====



== Webapp

To see your current application:

. log in to the XP admin console (http://localhost:8080)
. open the "Applications" app, and select the listed applications
. visit the app by clicking the web app link.

video::webapp.mp4["Logging in, opening apps and launching webapp" width=1024px]


== JS Controller

The essense of a web application is the controller.
In your project, you will find the following file:

.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
exports.get = function (req) {
  var title = "Hello Web app";
  return  {
  body: `
<html>
  <head>
    <title>${title}</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
      <h1>Sweet, "${title}" is working!</h1>
      <img src="html5logo.svg"/>
  </body>
</html>
`
  }
};
----

This controller file is automatically executed when your web app is being accessed.

The example above is also referencing two asset files.
These files can be found in the `src/main/resources/assets/` folder of your project.

[NOTE]
====
By default, the web app engine automatically serves files placed in the `asset/` as if they were located in the root of your web app.
====

== Using Views

According to the MVC (Model View Controller) pattern,
we should separate the View (template) from the controller.
Enonic XP supports a variety of templating engines.
In this step, we'll use https://market.enonic.com/vendors/enonic/thymeleaf-lib[Thymeleaf]:

. To make sure Thymeleaf is available for our project, we must update the `gradle.build` file.
Uncomment the following line from the "dependencies" section:
+
      include "com.enonic.lib:lib-thymeleaf:2.0.0-RC1"
+
. Create a new file `hello.html` and add it to the `webapp/` folder
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,html]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/hello.html[]
----
+
. Then update your controller file to use the new template:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/webapp.js[]
----
+
. When finished, redeploy the app. NB! Just start a new shell if your current shell is running the sandbox:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

Refresh your app, and you should see the heading "*Sweet... Views are working too!*".

[TIP]
====
A cool feature related to Thymeleaf templates is that they are actually pure HTML.
Meaning they may be opened directly in your browser.
Try opening the hello.html file to see for yourself:
====

image::hello-dummy.png["Screenshot of template showing dummy heading and html5 logo",width=800px]

== Asset serving

Our approach asset serving is simple, but not optimal.
XP also provides a more optimized solution for serving assets where:

* Asset url are created automatically (no need to deal with relative paths)
* Assets get "infinite" cache headers (used by proxies and browsers)
* Every time you deploy a new app, new url's are generated (no more stale assets)

To use this functionality, we simply need to update our view template:

. Update `hello.html` template with the following content:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-template/hello-assets.html[]
----
+
. Redeploy once more:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

After refreshing your app and inspecting the html5 logo, you should now see something like this:

  <img src="/webapp/webapp.demo/_/asset/webapp.demo:1557487230/html5logo.svg">

TIP: Check out the "Network" tab in your browsers dev tools to see the cache headers

== Routing

Routing, or handling different URLs within your app is a common requirement for web applications.

In this step we will create a basic server-side router.
In addition to the start page, we will create two more pages and handle navigation between them.

. This time we will use the https://market.enonic.com/vendors/enonic/router-lib[router library]. Add the following line to the dependencies section of the `build.gradle` file to make it available.
+
  include "com.enonic.lib:lib-router:2.0.0-RC1"
+
. Then update your `webapp.js` and `hello.html` as follows:
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/webapp.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-router/webapp.js[]
----
+
.src/main/resources/webapp/hello.html
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/webapp-router/hello.html[]
----
. Build and deploy the app once more to see the result:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

Once the app is deployed, reload and enjoy navigating between the pages.

NOTE: Notice the use of `pageUrl()` to dynamically generate server relative URLs for the pages. This eliminates the need for dealing with relative links etc.


////
== Error handler

You might have noticed the "404 FTW" link in your app by now, and maybe even clicked it?
Essentially, the this url is not handled by the router, and returns the default error page.

We can do better, as XP provides a concept for generic http error handling. Lets add error handling to our app:

. Add a new controller `error.js` to your project as follows:
+
.src/main/resources/error/error.js
[source,js]
----
include::../code-samples/error/error.js[]
----
+
. Build, deploy and try out your new error handler:
+
  enonic project deploy
+

== Config management

TODO

Our app is using the Google Maps API.
Heavy usage of Googles services requires a valid API key.

Hardcoding an API key into your app is far from ideal.
Luckily, XP provides a simple way to inject configuration, like the API key, without having to change your app.

. Start by https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript/get-api-key[getting yourself a Google API key]
. Create a file called <name.of.your.app>.cfg i.e. "my.first.site.cfg" with the following content:
+
  maps.apiKey = <your google api key>
+
. Copy this file into your sandbox' config folder. The sandbox is located in your users home folder at .enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sandbox>/home/config/
. After placing the file in the sandbox, you should now see a line from the sandbox log showing something like this:
+
  2019-05-05 20:07:39,462 INFO  c.e.x.s.i.config.ConfigInstallerImpl - Loaded config for [<name.of.your.app>]
+

To verify that the configuration is in use,
check the source code for a country page to see the following:
+
  <script src="http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/js?key=yourGoogleKey>"></script></head>
+

////


== Setting up a vhost

Our webapp URL does not look like something we would want in production.
XP provides a concept called Vhosts to map the internal XP URI to a public facing URL i.e. `mywebapp.com` -> `/webapp/my.app.name/`.

. Start by locating your sandbox' config folder. It is placed within your users home folder at `.enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sandbox>/home/config/`
. Update the `com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg` file in the config/ folder as follows:
+
.enonic/sandboxes/<name-of-sanbox>/home/config/com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg
[source,properties]
----
include::../code-samples/com.enonic.xp.web.vhost.cfg[]
----
+
NOTE: Remember to update the value of `mapping.mywebapp.target` to match the URI to your webapp i.e. "/webapp/my.cool.app/"
+
. After saving the vhost config file, you should see the following line the XP Sandbox log:
+
  2019-05-10 11:34:17,234 INFO  c.e.x.w.v.i.c.VirtualHostConfigImpl - Virtual host is enabled and mappings updated.
+
. Finally, a small trick to fool our browser into thinking `mywebapp.com` is pointing to your local machine. Add the following line to your hosts file.
+
  127.0.0.1	mywebapp.com
+
NOTE: On Mac/Linux_: `/etc/hosts`, on Windows: `c:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc\hosts`
+
. Point your browser to http://mywebapp.com:8080 to see the glorious result.

Read more about https://developer.enonic.com/docs/xp/stable/deployment/config#vhost[vhost configuration] in the XP docs.

== Logging

While developing an app, it can be helpful to do some logging.
Try adding the following line into the exports.get section of your webapp controller and see what happens:

  log.info('Testing logging: %s', JSON.stringify(req, null, 4));

NOTE: A simplified logging function and many more are included in the https://market.enonic.com/vendors/enonic/util-lib[Util Library]
